= Managing Metrics with Datadog

:imagesdir: https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/raw/v3/userguide/assets/aws


== Single Tier and Multitier Implementations

Measurements and metrics are an important part of managing your Kill
Bill system to be sure that performance is optimized and any problems
can be detected early. Kill Bill collects over 1300 metrics to show you
every conceivable view of your system's behavior.

Several third party tools are available to manage and display metrics of
this type. One popular tool is https://www.datadoghq.com/[datadog]. This
package offers a low-cost option to monitor and display whatever metrics
you may find useful from the Kill Bill collection, including metrics
that show the performance and resource use of Kill Bill and Kaui
themselves, and metrics describing the infrastructure on which these
systems run.

Datadog can be integrated with several types of Kill Bill installations. In this article we discuss the use of datadog to manage metrics produced
by two types of implementations on Amazon Web Services (AWS):
Single Tier and Multitier. With the latest Amazon Machine Image (AMI)
for Kill Bill, it is very easy to direct the Kill Bill metrics to
datadog and work with them in the way that best suits your needs.

== Your Kill Bill System

We assume that you have a working Kill Bill implementation running on
AWS, using either the
https://docs.killbill.io/latest/aws-singletier.html[Single Tier] or
https://docs.killbill.io/latest/aws-multitier.html[Multitier]
installation options. The single tier option runs Kill Bill, Kaui, the
MariaDB database and the nginx load balancer on a single AWS EC2
instance. This is suitable for quick deployment and for testing and
development. The multitier option runs Kill Bill and Kaui on two or more
separate EC2 instances, and uses an AWS RDS database manager along with
an AWS load balancer. This is an attractive option for many production
uses.

You should be running Kill Bill version 2021.9 or later. This version
can be configured to provide its full collection of Kill Bill metrics to
datadog (and several other analysis tools). If you open the Kill Bill
admin page in your browser, it should show that you are
running the "Kill Bill Premium edition":

image::metrics-kb-admin.png[align=center]


If you see this page you are ready to go. If not, you should upgrade
your installation.

While you are on this page, if you want to see all the metrics that Kill
Bill has to offer, just add the path `/1.0/metrics` to the URL. Have fun!
If you find these hard to understand, though, maybe datadog can help.

== Setting up Datadog

You may already be familiar with datadog. If not, this section will
explain how to get started.

First, go to the https://www.datadoghq.com/[datadog website]. Datadog
offers a free trial to get started. After the trial, you will be charged
monthly depending on what types of information you want them to manage.
To sign up for the free trial, select "GET STARTED FREE" at the top of
the page.

When you login to datadog you will be taken to the Welcome page. Note
the series of menu options on the left hand side.

To setup datadog to manage the metrics available from Kill Bill, there
are just two steps: (1) install the datadog agent in Kill Bill, and (2)
authorize the transfer of the complete Kill Bill metrics.

== Installing the Agent

The first step in integrating an analysis tool, like datadog, and a
source of data to analyze, like Kill Bill, is to setup a means to get
the source to send its data to the analyzer. Datadog does this by
installing the *datadog agent* in the system producing the data.

In the main datadog menu, select *Integrations*, then scroll down in the
submenu to select *Agent*. This will show you a page listing all of the
platforms on which the datadog agent can be installed. Choose *Ubuntu*.
The next page will show you the single step required for this platform
to install the agent:

image::metrics-datadog-install.png[align=center]


To install the agent, login to your EC2 instance, then copy the line
shown by datadog to the Ubuntu command line. Press Enter. The agent
should be installed automatically.

Note that this command already includes the Api Key assigned to you by
datadog. This will authorize the agent to do its job.

If you are using the Multitier installation, you will have multiple EC2
instances. The agent should be installed separately for each one.

To test the installation, return to datadog and choose *Infrastructure*,
then *Infrastructure List* from the left menu. The table that appears
should list all of your hosts and indicate their status as *ACTIVE*. You
may need to wait a few minutes for the table to appear.

Now select *Metrics*, then *Summary* from the menu. You should see a
long list of metrics! These are coming from your instances, but they
only describe the Ubuntu environment itself. You do not yet have the
Kill Bill metrics. To fix this, proceed to the next step.

== Setting up the Authorization

To authorize the sending of the Kill Bill metrics, it is necessary to
edit two lines in the file `/var/lib/tomcat/bin/setenv2.sh`. This file
contains configuration information for `tomcat`, which manages the
KillBill web applications.

This is a small file. The two lines to be edited are:

```
-Dcom.killbill.datadog.enable=false
-Dcom.killbill.datadog.apiKey=
```

These should be changed to

```
-Dcom.killbill.datadog.enable=true
-Dcom.killbill.datadog.apiKey=__Your-API-Key__
```

The API Key to be added is the same one contained in the command you
used to install the agent.

After editing the file, go to your AWS EC2 dashboard and *reboot the
instance* so the new configuration file will be read. If you have more
than one instance, follow the same procedure for each one.

Now return to the *Metrics/Summary* page. After a short delay, you
should see a lot more metrics -- well over 1000 in your list.

Congratulations. Your datadog integration is complete!

== Using Datadog

The datadog site has lots of documentation, and we will not try to
repeat any of that here. We will just suggest a few quick steps to get
started:

. Go to *Metrics* in the menu and *Explorer* in the submenu. Click on
the field labeled *Graph:* to get a dropdown list of all available
metrics.
. Select some metrics to see the graph they produce. Identify the ones
you would like to see together in a dashboard.
. Gather the names of the metrics you want in the *Graph:* field
together.
. Under *Export these graphs to:* select *New Dashboard*. Give your
dashboard a name.

Your dashboard will appear in the *Dashboard List* under the
*Dashboards* menu item. You can create and modify multiple dashboards.
You can also adjust the graphs in many ways, and do lots of other things
like setting alarms. Have fun and good luck!
